What about pre-training or even
post-training makes it possible for the
models to generalize in these magical
emergent ways and controlling that
process so that a company has a set of
private data? How do we make the models
[music] learn that just as well as the
models know like the capital of France
or you know like how to write Python? Um
so I think it it's a really fun problem
to think about.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Welcome to training data. We are
delighted to have Don Beerman and Jesse
Lynn, co-founders of Engram today.
Engram is a neolab focused on memory and
continual learning and two of the
hottest topics in all of AI research
today. Okay. And Sean and I are
delighted to dig in on those topics with
you today.
>> Awesome. Happy to be here.
>> Great. So maybe to kick off, the engram
website says, "We don't see the world
through the lens of pre-training or
post-training. Our models are always
training. What does that mean?"
>> So I think like models today obviously
know a lot of things. They're incredibly
smart. Um but we kind of think the
bottleneck for making these models more
useful these days is not really raw
intelligence, but understanding like new
and evolving context. So whether it's
like you know a new task that you're
doing or a particular context um for you
know like a job or something like this
um how do you bake that into the model
weights the same way that you know
pre-training and post- training bakes
into the model weights very deeply and
this is kind of why we think of
ourselves as working on these
fundamental problems of memory and
continue learning which are really two
sides of the same coin. How do you make
the models learn new things um and bake
them deeply into the weights of the
model? And is your premise then that
memory as a separate database or
separate you know thing that you shove
into the context window is not true
memory and it's not true continual
learning.
>> I think all of these tools will kind of
come together. So these days like the
way that people are solving these
problems is with context engineering. So
you take like a huge prompt maybe you
like keep talking to the model over many
many turns and hours and um you know
reorganize the context to better
understand like what you're trying to
do. And we think like these kinds of
things like tool use, context
engineering will play a part. But I
think an underleveraged tool these days
is using the same kind of training um
pipeline or framework or kind of
workflow that the frontier labs are
using to make these models really good
at frontier math or code but applying
that to every kind of domain, every kind
of context that you have like let's say
in a company.
>> Yeah. And to me it's like as an
individual um taking notes and having
sticky notes is a very valuable thing.
we should never discard this. But
whenever we get back to business the
next day, we always have some sort of
trace of memory in our brain, some new
intuition about how things should should
be and where should we look. So these
two things should come together. And
current solutions are more kind of
externalized memory. Um and this has two
two issues. One is that the amount of
tokens we will all collectively
individually generate is going to be in
the tens of millions of tokens per day
soon. So just keeping it and searching
through it is going to be and rereading
it's going to be pretty expensive but
it's gonna also be pretty hard pretty
confusing for the models unless we have
major major breakthroughs and how
>> billions of tokens for Sean [laughter]
>> that's good depends on the day
>> could you maybe tell us a little bit
about the engram architecture or the
engram product and and how it works
>> yeah I mean at a high level I think what
we're trying to do is take any context
like there's all these different um
workspaces let's say Um so we're working
with partners like notion and Microsoft
and Harvey that have these places where
people are doing a lot of work over a
long period of time. There's all this
context um both in terms of like you
know documents that you've already
written as a team as well as like now
people are interacting with these agents
more and more on these products um or
having conversations giving them
feedback um and figuring out how to have
a model that deeply understands that
context. So not just reading the files
at test time, but really understanding
it the way that an employee that's
worked at your company for years has. So
you kind of understand at a high level,
oh, these are the initiatives across the
company. Um, this is the way that we do
things. Um, you've studied like how to
run the hiring pipeline or how to, you
know, do this kind of thing within the
company. Um, and can operate just as
well as, um, like any anybody else can
in the company. And so what we're doing
is training per team models within these
workspaces that deeply understand those
contexts and can improve with time on
the things that people care about. Um so
the way that we do this at like a
technical level maybe is um training
these into weights. So we do a lot of
like adapter fine-tuning. So adapters of
many types like I think people have
looked into this for decades at this
point like whether it's Lauras or
prefixes or you know sparse
architectures. I think like all of these
tools are at our disposal. Um and then
figuring out what the right data is. So
how do you turn any kind of raw like
document or interaction into useful
training signal for the model? So again
we have like a variety of tools now like
supervised fine-tuning you know um RL um
you know on policy distillation like all
these things that you know the field has
kind of developed um and trying to fit
these pieces together into a model that
learns continuously on the things that
people care about.
>> Yeah. And it's not a bet that tools are
not there like our models always work
under the assumption that some knowledge
is externalized. Some tools are always
there. But what you need to do is you
need to figure out and that's the hard
task is what needs to be internalized
and what can be externalized. And for
even for stuff that's externalized many
individuals and companies have their own
bespoke tools and ways of doing things.
Not everyone has the same uh you know
bash CLI tools that you know the
frontier models are training on and how
to get the models to better understand
your bespoke setup I think is its own
interesting thing. H. And so is the
premise then that my notion agent will
be a custom agent that is Laura
fine-tuned or you know it's some way
with an adapter tuned so that it's
constantly learning on new content
that's added into my notion workspace.
Is that the premise?
>> Yeah. And they're working with many
models and they're the early users of
all the Frontier models and they're
probably going to keep doing that. Does
this approach work on the frontier
models or are the closed frontier models
or
>> we need we need white you know we need
white box access to the weights right so
you know we can partner with companies
that have you know closed source weights
and do this with them uh but it's
easiest for us to do it with with open
source uh models um but any model that's
a transformer model uh we can do our
thing to it
>> and what's the trade-off then when when
people are comparing the before and
before and after using you is it that
there no longer sending so much context.
Um, and so the trade-off is like you
burn more compute up front to learn your
company's way of doing things into the
weights and then you're sending less
context to the model on every inference
pass. Is that the rough
>> trade-off? That's that's one that's one
thing. The fact that you don't have to
research things and the fact and reread
things and the fact that you don't have
to write like monstrous system prompts
that already that can give you, you
know, two orders of magnitude reduction
in token uh inference consumption. It's
not like you know 50% or it's it can be
100x fewer tokens because many things
especially things that relate to people
and teams and organization and
priorities these are things that you
can't really find in one document unless
like you really have it really
regimented and document everything. Uh
and these kinds of things the model can
kind of implicitly learn by training on
some of the data and answer you know
within 100 tokens what what the best
frontier models would consume 100
thousand tokens doing. So these kinds of
examples are interesting and also the
the quality you know there are tasks
that are you know not supernatural for
the current generation of the models and
we we're we kind of think there's going
to be consistently this gap of like
three to six months ahead where there's
certain things that are bespoke that
people are just exploring the models are
not fully great for them. The models
will at some point be great for them but
if you can autonomously learn in in a
very lightweight way it will give value
in that time in terms of capabilities.
Why train on the workspace level versus
the individual level for example?
>> Uh either is is fine for us. It's just
easier to start with you know it teams
of people have you know are more you
know disciplined in how they collect
context and in the amount of context
they have over years and it's easy for
us to start there but every person's
computer and every person's phone one
day is a useful you know target for our
technologies and in fact it will be very
interesting to to go there. We just
think you know the big deposits of
information are now in and teams of
people collaborating in knowledge work.
>> Is it a feature or a bug that there is
so much fact memorization basically
built into large language models? And
there's a school of thought that you
know the me the models just wrote
memorizing the fact that the capital of
France is Paris is actually a bad thing
>> and what we would prefer for the models
to do is you know abstractly learn the
concepts of countries and capital
cities. Yeah.
>> But not to memorize all these facts in
the weights. And so I'm curious what you
think about disentangling memorization
um versus learning, how it's done in the
models today and then how you're
thinking of approaching it.
>> Yeah, I think it's a really interesting
question. Like to some extent you kind
of need to remember stuff in order to
like compose them into more complex
concepts. I think the thing that's kind
of missing is figuring out what's
important to remember. And I think even
now when you think about like learning
new knowledge, if you look at a lot of
these academic benchmarks, it's like how
can we learn very specific facts like
you know the length of a bridge in this
like African country and that's not
something that you really want the
models to devote capacity for and it's
not something that we devote capacity
to. Um, so I think if you look at human
memory, I mean you can say a lot more
about this, but like it's lossy. Um,
because part of the feature of
intelligence is compressing what's
important and separating that from
what's not important. Um, and so I think
like you can't really separate fact
learning from like non-factarning or
skill learning as some people would like
to think. um like if you take a model
and like some people have done this with
models where you like strip out you know
like all the facts and just have it like
the pure core or something like this
it's very unnatural as a model it
doesn't know basic things um and you
kind of need need that but I think
>> why do you need that like why can't you
look up facts and then just have
>> I think if you look at like how the
models think if you need to recall basic
facts in order to like take the next
step in your thinking you can't get very
far u maybe that's like a high level
intuition, but it's part of like the
reason why we think training is really
important.
>> In order to like think more and more
complex and deep thoughts about things,
you kind of need to internalize
something so that you can compose them
into more abstract concepts.
>> Yeah. And there have been efforts before
that were hard to scale to try and, you
know, disentangle the two and pre-train
the models in a way that's, you know,
allows it to retrieve and search for
things and not internalize them. It's
just the recipe we know to hill climb on
collectively right now is this you know
fact pre-training step and I think the
the magic of of or the the mystery of
this approach is that you know
traditionally in CS we would have you
know databases as its own curriculum and
we would have algorithms and the
databases is like facts about the world
and capitals of whatever store them
query them there's also algorithms of
how do you efficiently manipulate
information and get some answers uh in
in a sample efficient way. And I think
the magic of deep learning is that these
two things are now mushed together and
we need all these smart people and
thropic interpretability to try and and
and break them apart. And I think a lot
of what we're seeing now in the adoption
of AI into the economy is that these
things are gradually separating again
where companies have their own context
and they really
handle them with care and engineer them
with care and there's a generic model
that's completely a stranger through
these contexts and the the model is
operating on them. But it for us it's
clear that there needs to be a certain
convergence uh at least with with some
cadence uh where where the the facts and
the stories and the details are are
getting mixed into the model. It has
disadvantages as well because if you you
have to you know capitals of of of
countries are you know they can change
but it's not very frequent but there's
many other facts are changing all the
time and just uh imprinting them into
weights is a is a challenging thing to
do.
>> I see. So you're saying it's a false
dichotomy that's try to separate
algorithms from databases here. Um what
really matters is like how to
distinguish what's important to
remember. Yeah.
>> Versus what's not important.
>> Exactly. And it's an open how we dream
and are you guys taking any inspiration
from that in in terms of ranking?
>> Very very loosely. I think just the idea
that that's kind of a phase that's
missing maybe where you take a context
and you deeply internalize it. Right now
it's like everything happens at test
time. you look at the, you know, context
that the user gives you and you do some
like thinking on the fly. Um, but again,
like you can't get very far. Um, or you
can get so far maybe and like you make
mistakes along the way. Like how do you
digest that back into the model so that
next time you do it, you do it the right
way and make even more progress.
>> Yeah. And and what are dreams? Dreams
are pretty crazy things to to say we
want to build an AI that's like our
dreams sounds a little bit like a nut
thing to do. Um, there's not a lot of
coherence there. But what's interesting
there is like what happens in our dreams
we we we see things we talk to ourselves
and we we experiment with the
affordances of what can we do and can't
we do in the world in social situations
and in you know u any any it's heavily
biased towards social uh stuff right so
for us too with things we're building is
you know you we give the models the time
to then go back retreat from the actual
interaction and experiment with its
affordances what can it do in an
environment what Can it what does it
know? How fast can it can it you know
handle these kind of tail extreme uh
things that same ones that we dream
about at night?
>> You guys come from academic backgrounds
like what's a canonical example that
motivates this problem or you know like
or that's a win so far.
>> Yeah, I have one example maybe Jesse can
give another one a hypothetical one. For
example, imagine one of the AI labs, say
OpenAI, has to win some math Olympiad in
a week time from now. Would they
construct a catalog of all the math
textbooks and really have people
annotate which chapters to get and which
graphs to to see or will they actually
collect this, synthesize some training
data, launch a training job, see where
it lands in five, six days, start
evaluating it and stuff like that. So
it's it's obvious for anyone who's
trained models that there's superior way
to integrate across the ideas and
capabilities and it involves this kind
of magic of training. Um and we are
clear that this has to happen in those
highstake domains of math and coding and
cyber and stuff. We just think much of
this magic can actually end up in in the
hands of of many more people and in
interesting ways
>> like why isn't it just the fi the
foundation model labs that own the end
product here? you like how do you go
between giants?
>> Yeah. So I think like the worldview that
we have is a bit different from the
frontier lab worldview where it's like
we want one model that's bigger and
bigger that's more and more intelligent
across a variety of domains. Instead how
we see it like we kind of imagine this
world where everybody has their own
model. A lot of the things that people
want to learn are either private like
things that will never see the light of
day in a post-training data set or even
conflicting like oh the way that I want
to do the task is different from how
another company or another individual
wants to. And I think a lot of these
things we're already seeing are um hard
to train into the models with the same
tools that we have used for like decades
in machine learning which is like you
have really clean supervision. you have
like ground truth reward signals um and
you like create a nice environment and
you like train the model to like use the
tools to better accomplish this like
coding task and instead a lot of the
things that actually happen out in the
world are very ambiguous or like um it's
hard to say like what makes something
good. Um, and so I think a lot of these
things are very specific to individuals
and I think very kind of misaligned or
not very aligned with how the Frontier
Labs think about the whole training
pipeline and what kind of models will
exist in the longer term.
>> Yeah. And to add to it, I think you know
what is the P zero for the Frontier Labs
and some of you here are are pretty
close with them. It's getting to AGI,
getting this one generic model that's
extremely capable in coding and math and
then using it to to automate the economy
or to solve really hard, you know,
long-term problems in cryptography and
defense or whatever. Um, and it's pretty
clear what needs to happen to push this.
You know, more pre-training, bigger
models, more data, uh, more RL, more
inference time compute, that kind of
stuff. That's PZ. That's where the
majority of of expenditure and talent
goes. And definitely all of them are
thinking about memory and all of them
are thinking about continual learning.
It's just more of a product kind of
effort right now. Um we think um it
deserve it deserves its own its own
attention and we think breakthroughs
need to happen there and and Demis and
the Sequoia event about a month ago said
pretty clearly we need new breakthroughs
around these topics and obviously
they're thinking about them. we're just
focusing exclusively on this and we
think uh certain things around
incentives of where the data is uh and
who owns the model are pretty
interesting. Um so if you could learn
from many humans or organizations at
scale uh without necessarily sending
someone work with them
shoulder-to-shoulder uh that would be a
pretty big unlock
>> and maybe another point on that is like
I think a lot of things need to look
different in the world. So one is there
needs to be new research breakthroughs.
Two is new infrastructure for training
like you know small models for everybody
rather than like one big model one big
run. Um and then the third I think is um
a different way of kind of combining
research and product. Um so right now I
think like there's like researchers in
these frontier labs. They kind of train
the model. They throw it over the fence
to the product team who then like
prompts or context engineers like new
product surfaces on top of the core
models. Um, but in this world where the
models are always training, I think the
inputs that users provide are very
intricately tied to what the models
learn from, like what the training
signal is. And so there needs to be a
lot more of a kind of integrated loop
between like research and product. And
so like while we're focused on tackling
a lot of the core research challenges
and that's our background, I think we're
also very focused on like how to deploy
this as quickly as possible to like
learn from actual feedback in the real
world.
>> What motivated you to work on this
problem? I think like it's obviously
like one of the grand challenges in AI.
I think everybody's talking about it
these days because like the models are
so smart. What what else is left? You
know, it's I think learning like at the
edges like learning the remainders of
what makes these models useful. Um it's
not just about raw intelligence anymore.
It's about like learning new things. Um
and I think it also feels very
fundamental because it kind of goes back
to really understanding what makes the
model so good. So right now the models
kind of incidentally know a lot of
things from pre-training and we don't
really understand why. Um it's like the
internet was just you know this gift
granted to us where um there's like a
diverse set of data that contains like
all of these different examples of
coding and like writing and all these
other things and it just happened that
way. And now to figure out how to crack
this problem of continual learning, it's
about figuring out what about
pre-training or even post-training makes
it possible for the models to generalize
in these magical emergent ways and
controlling that process so that you
know a company has a set of private
data. How do we make the models learn
that just as well as the models know
like the capital of France or you know
like how to write Python? Um, so I think
it it's a really fun problem to think
about.
>> And Don, you came from the neuroscience
world. Is that right?
>> Yes. Yes. So I was initially interested
in in questions around, you know,
consciousness and the human condition
and things like that.
>> Are the models conscious?
>> I don't have any any uh advanced
thoughts on this more than you would you
would read. I don't think so. But it's
important that smart people are thinking
about it. I would say like I was
interested in how humans think, how
humans perceive. And as Amos Ferski, the
Israeli psychologist, used to say like
he's not interested in artificial
intelligence. He's interested in natural
stupidity. So I would say like I started
kind of similarly trying to see how
people and animals experience the world.
Gradually, you know, my inclinations
took me to the stats and AI domains and
there I figured that so many of the same
problems of memory and continual
learning are really really urgent and
the kind of solutions we have in the
current systems are pretty far from what
we have in biology. And I'm not one of
these people who would say that the the
machine should be like, you know, like
the animal or the the human brain. I
don't think so. There's many things
computers can do better than us. But
human memory has these like very
different uh things in it. It's you
know, if you want to store a whole code
base or you you can use a computer, you
don't even need AI on the computer to
store everything losslessly and just get
it. But the human brain evolved to work
in these constraints of of, you know,
information capacity and to have these
fuzzy representations that can then, you
know, be abstracted and form connections
and informed the next day. Current
systems don't really have that beyond
the generic pre-training step. And I was
really interested in, you know, what are
ways to to to build that in what are
ways to learn from that.
>> This is more of a philosophical
question. You know, you mentioned in the
brain how there's a bunch of different
real estate there's different
co-processing units, whatever modern
computer architecture, there's CPUs,
GPUs, you know, memory, there's
different co-processors.
Um, with like the bitter lesson, do you
think that what's happening is that like
LLMs are, you know, converge to say like
one co-processor that's just totally
dominant. it's like everything all
compute is going to happen in you know
the GPU equivalent of like a language
model or do you think that these models
are kind of building a bunch of
co-processors like you know emergently
inside the model like like you know and
take with memory like do you think that
the models themselves will just build
you know whatever part of the brain
equivalent would be that's good at
memory or or do you think there needs to
be like another standalone architecture
that
>> yeah like is is memory an emergent
property almost versus like
>> and almost everything like is everything
that we need in intelligence will just
be emergent with better training data
and more scaled compute
>> yeah I would say just on a more like
superficial perspective on the current
deployment of AI it's way more than than
just GPUs and we're seeing all these you
know sandboxes exploding and models
operating on other computers trying
things
>> I'm more mean on the model architecture
level rather than on the
>> so other experiment there there have
been many previous experiments different
architectures that we contributed to uh
like the state space family and others
to try and handle very very long context
more efficiently. Uh the thing with all
these methods, it ends up being a
trade-off, usually a trade-off between
memory and accuracy. And memory not in
the behavioral cognitive sense, memory
and the computer sense, right? Instead
of having, you know, the the memory
footprint of the transformer attention
which is quadratic in the sequence
length. Uh these models have
>> some are claiming, you know, they have
sub quadratic.
>> Yeah. Some claim and some do have it,
right? And some of the the best Chinese
model have layers that are you know
inspired by those state space
architectures and are you know not
quadratic in cost thing is is that in in
in our hands we find that you you always
compromise accuracy for this memory
there's no free lunch uh and what we're
saying is like look if you're really
bitterless and pilled what you want to
do is you want to think how can I burn
more compute and how can I burn it on
you know new context that I have not
seen before. So we're as bitter or less
impilled as anyone else. Uh and we are
not betting that the overall direction
of AGI is is going to you know end
anywhere soon. We just think there's
more compute to scale and if I truly
want to understand Shawn and Sean's work
and Sean's context just like rereading
files is not going to make it especially
for a special person like you.
>> We got to derogatory.
>> We got to train [laughter] 100 trillion
parameter for this guy.
>> Y
>> cosine cosine. Um, what are you finding
that people care most about their models
learning? Like is it memorizing facts
about the organization? Is it
remembering like ah no, we do CI this
way? Is it like what what are people
actually hoping to and then maybe this
feeds into how you do do the ranking of
memory slots and all that?
>> Yeah. Well, I think if you look at what
people are spending their time in the
app layer doing these days, it's a lot
of just trying to make the model work
well for your use case. like, oh, I want
the model to like, you know, let's say
like design my website with my brand
style. Like that's like a, you know,
very common example these days. But
there's many kinds of different tasks
that people do with agents. Um, like
learning how to run a workflow, um, or,
you know, kind of your particular way of
like writing, let's say. Um, so there's
many many kinds of things. And honestly
like I think when we think about these
methods kind of going back to this
distinction between like facts and
skills there really is none. Um I think
the methods are kind of agnostic to
that.
>> Yeah. To me it's like the the natural
thing almost all the app layers are
basically you know a frontier model
wrapped in in a loop with search tools
and stuff. And what they're all
interested in doing with us is finding
ways to kind of interface with their
data in a way that's you know faster,
more efficient and also is more
contextual. So almost all of them it's
like [snorts] we want to have our you
know our firm knowledge you know be
encoded in something that's more
efficient that I don't have to research.
We want to have the model know in a
targeted way who's the person I should
triage a thing to. And we're just
showing them that with pretty
lightweight training, these things can
can be instinctual to the models. They
don't have to have these very involved
long uh ripple loops to to solve them.
So it's in a sense it's like um you know
it's it's a rag killer kind of um kind
of thing. Again, we can always do rag
and we can always retrieve, but that's
the thing that people are interested in
interfacing with very large data planes
and automating very repetitive uh things
this way.
>> Yeah. And I want to double click on this
rag killer thing. And I'm sorry to beat
a dead horse. I just don't fully gro it
yet.
>> Yeah.
>> Um,
>> is the premise that there's some
tradeoff between doing rag versus
updating your model weights? Is it the
idea that you should be doing both? Like
what types of things should be done in
the weights versus what types of things
should be externalized to rag?
>> I think it's a it's an unsolved problem.
I don't think anyone has answered it.
Um, we're all working on it. Um it's
also the fundamental question of like
biological memory. What should be
internalized versus what not. Um I do
think that things that are like you know
do you need to internalize the room
number in a hotel that you were in like
a year ago? Probably no. Not in your
neural tissue. Uh probably that's good
to write down. But do you need to
internalize maybe the password to your
home right now? Probably it's useful for
the next few years to have that
imprinted somewhere. So yeah, how does
this translate into like knowledge work
and products? This is still something we
figure out and we try to take the
approach that we try to use as few
uristics as possible. It's easy to run
filters on the data and say like I'm
going to keep this, discard that, train
on this, train on that. But as humans,
you know, we watch Tik Tok and we, you
know, get exposed to a lot of garbage
and still the brain is able to learn and
not completely go off the rails and we
think models should be the same as well.
Yeah, maybe concretely in the short
term, I think a lot of what people are
worried about these days is the huge
inference costs of running these agents
like for days on end. Um,
>> high inference costs a good thing.
[laughter]
>> I mean, consuming tokens for what?
>> Sonia works with fireworks. She really
loves [laughter]
>> inference.
We love inference, too.
>> Yeah. So I think it's like in the short
term I think that's the immediate pain
point like why are you reading the same
files over and over again you know even
in the same query but like definitely
you know across people in the same
company they're running the same queries
on the same documents over and over
again and that should be something the
model just knows like in the same way
you ask an employee they don't you know
type into the search box like what what
was I working on yesterday they just
know
>> but doesn't caching kind of solve that
>> I think to some extent yeah but I think
going back to this like question of what
should be internalized versus what's um
like something you retrieve at test
time. I think again like a lot of it is
about building on your knowledge. So if
you are always doing rag, you can't make
associations like oh you know I see
somebody you know on the team is doing
this kind of research and I kind of like
recall at an abstract level. Oh there's
this like related thing that you might
want to know about. You didn't even ask
about it right? But I think like these
kinds of associations can only happen in
weights because they're not really about
you know you ask me to search for this
I'm going to search for this.
>> Yeah. And also the I think the main
limitation with retrieval systems in
general and in AI specifically is like
the problem is not so much what to store
and where to put it. It's the problem is
like how how to address it like how to
query the thing. Do you know what to
look for even? Yeah.
>> And this is involves some sort of
intuition that sometimes the models
don't have. Interestingly enough they
don't know where to look. uh and and
especially if you're you know limited to
the the current way of doing things
which is keyword search that is just
easier to scale in RL and least involved
in terms of like infra for embeddings
and stuff. So yeah, knowing what to
search is something that's intuitive and
can and can happen in the weights and
also about caching and inference like
much of this company started with us
taking like a deep dive into like KV
caches and caching and this is a a
fascinating thing right KV cache is a
monstrosity of the current uh way of
doing things that you know think about
it a KV cache for a single like
Wikipedia article for some you know
Taylor Swift or something like this it
will be like 80 [snorts] gigabytes of
HBM memory on the GPU and an entire
llama it's it's for say a 70B llama
model and the entire weights of the
model would be about 100 gigabytes and
you know with with some distortion they
remember the entire internet um and how
come this thing is so uh one thing is so
bit efficient and this we have this
proof of existence that gradient descent
can pack a lot of information in very
few numbers whereas this KV cache thing
you take a few tens kilobytes of article
and it becomes those 80 gigabytes of of
brain state. So sure you can cach this,
you can load this, you'll have issues
with disk to HBM uh stuff people are
working on it. It's pretty interesting.
But what if we can take those 80
gigabytes, spend some compute offline,
maybe also in fireworks and file, but
then compress it and make it really
really small so that the thing we load
in cache is like a thousandx smaller
that would have tremendous implications
for how we load things, how fast we can
do things, and what the fidelity of the
representation is.
>> Super interesting.
>> Yeah. What are some of the things that
could happen in the next year or two
that would be like the chat GBT moment
of memory? Or do you think that that's
not how things will play out?
>> It's a good question. Um, I don't know.
I think like the first proof of concept
of the thing that people keep talking
about with continual learning, which is
you have an intern that you can teach
things over time and it actually gets
better. I think everybody's waiting to
see that, you know, and no matter how
sophisticated the context engineering
approaches are these days, they're not
getting there. So, I think you need, you
know, all of these tools at your
disposal to make that happen. Um, but I
think it will be something like that
where it's like the model's actually
getting smarter like whoa, it it's
different from yesterday.
>> Yeah. And it's important to say that the
Chad GPT model was not anticipated.
we've just you know read about all the
different product the product directions
that certain people had before Chad GPA
was different. Um I feel like to me the
example is like look if you you know
resigned from your job today and your
sole mission was to make a model that's
better for you and you would use open
anthropic and all these frontier models
and you just 247 engineer the context
right skills your way to move the needle
is very limited as an individual. you'll
just be better off waiting for the next
version of the model and and you'll take
it from there. And we would like um to
see a future where actually the more
time you spend on the thing actually
translates to the quality of performance
at least in the things and domains you
you care about. Um and this is pretty
hard to achieve and the only reason it
we we think it could be achieved is if
you start scaling compute and training
on these data without destroying them
all importantly which is pretty hard.
Just a couple like this is just for fun
like rapid fire questions going off just
memory.
>> When's the last time you reached
surprised about something in AI in any
area
>> when reading about fundraising?
[laughter]
>> A lot of surprises every day. I would
say all of us felt you know a little bit
of a change around the capabilities of
the coding agents.
>> That's true.
>> Uh but we we've been you know dabbling
with these things and trying to make
them work in in more effortful ways
before so it didn't come as a complete
surprise. Um but yeah, I think to me the
main events were GitHub copilot. That
for me was just the main event and chat
GPT and then seeing the agentic stuff.
We all anticipated I think and and
different different people had different
expectations on how far it can go and
how long horizon it can go. But I feel
yeah it's we're we're yet to see
something fundamentally different and
people are working on completely new
ways of doing things now. Um but yeah,
to me it's it's models actually changing
in a way that's not harmful uh and
learning new things uh on the fly that
are, you know, personally and
economically viable. That's interesting.
>> Right now there's this idea of like
we're each going to have a token wallet
that we're going to bring around to
companies
>> or to different apps um different
workspaces. Do you think that we're
gonna end up with like a memory bank, a
memory wallet that we're going to move
around
>> to across the digital world as we go?
>> I think it's an interesting question. I
don't know if we've fully figured out
what the right kind of like product form
factor is in this sense. In a way, even
with like chatbt memory, let's say, I
kind of don't want it to remember across
my like personal and work context. Oh,
yeah. like it's like oh you know you
might like these sheets because you
trained a model on a GPU last week it's
like that's totally irrelevant and to
some extent it's like because the memory
is flawed but also I think you do want
memory in your I guess tools and the
products that you use to be separated to
have control over that. So I personally
think like there needs to be some
separation there but I guess to be
determined what that might look like.
>> Yeah. And like I think a holy grail is
like you go to work and you just burn
through all these tokens and you create
all this value and somehow you know all
the IP and stuff stays with the company
but somehow the skills you learned the
things you invented your ways of doing
things. Some of them you can take with
you as well to your next job in a way
that's you know sanitized and not you
know harmful to any other company's IP.
So I do think like carrying um a set of
skills uh will be interesting. We do it
in our biology right now and we just you
know sign NDAs and have like ethical
rules around it. But I think doing it in
a digital world would be pretty
interesting and pretty rewarding because
it will force each of us to push the
frontier and implement AI more deeply in
our companies in our individual life and
then be rewarded for it. I started a PhD
in the SAS firm in 2007
at at Stanford and AI like AI was boring
as hell at the time. was all statistical
learning and there's basically two areas
like computer vision and NLP. So like
vision and and language were kind of the
two areas and I think that's still true.
In 2012 Alexand happened like vision was
dominating for six years or whatever.
Are you guys surprised that language
seems to be like the language approach
seems to be like dominating over vision
in progress? Question two, do you think
vision has any chance of coming back?
How do you think about this?
>> Yeah, I think it is pretty surprising to
me. I mean, some people maybe saw it
coming, but I think I've always kind of
been interested in language um as like I
don't know, I guess like a medium for
communication and like so many kind of
complex abstract things can be done in
language. Um, I do think like, you know,
I imagine like in the longer term,
language and vision will kind of like
combine in this more like unified system
where, you know, we kind of like take in
inputs from all of these different
modalities and like understand them in
this abstract way. But, um, yeah.
>> Yeah. To me, like I've never been
interested in language. It seemed to me
such a such an advanced capability that
you know is is very the the entire
animal kingdom has very different forms
of of speech and language than what we
you know and how we communicate with
ourselves and in writing. Uh [snorts]
and I was always as many other leaders
in AI had this thought that you know the
natural thing is you have to experience
the world act in it and vision and
action that will be the the key. But
then I've, you know, like anyone else
seen the the Chad GPT moment and went to
to do some work at Mosaic and stuff like
that to learn how the sausage is made on
the on the NLP side. And the thing
that's striking is that like the the
language should be pretty hard like each
word has this uh one hot embedding
vector that's as dissimilar to any other
word uh than it is you know uh to you
know it's it's a completely
highdimensional space and it's really
artificial in a sense and we we learn it
with models that are order of magnitude
bigger than the best vision models and
still you know things work pretty well.
I do think there's a lot of juice to be
squeezed in in in an image and video and
I think you guys doing good good
investments in this space but it's I
think the two would keep being
interesting in different ways.
>> I'm going now tell you my that was my
leadup. Now I'm going to tell you the
crackpot theory. [laughter]
>> Um I like and this this podcast is not
for me to pontificate. It's for you
guys. But this is something I've been
thinking a lot about and I just you're
the right people to share this with. I I
was pretty shocked that language kind of
surpassed vision and I underestimated
what was happening with LLMs in like
2018, 2019, 2020 because I just had this
bias towards vision. And when I look
back on it now, like I think what is
basically happening is that in biology,
like vision has a massive fundamental
advantage over language in biology. And
maybe I'm wrong, but basically like the
bit rate that your brain can process
optical data through the eye is, and
this is my I'm not a biologist. This
just kind of my dumb assessment seems
many orders of magnitude greater. And
there's a lot of like optical processing
that happens like even before you reach
you know like electrons and so just like
the total bit rate that is of training
data that's kind of
being processed and then making it to
your brain seems many or semanted
greater than the audio data where you
know it's sound waves where sound waves
are fundamentally like much slower bit
rate than light.
>> Yeah. And then there's almost like like
an upscaling from the acoustics to
electronics which make it into your
brain where it's like there's like a
downscaling from photons to electrons
with vision. Whereas in computers today
everything is electronic. So it's kind
of like you nerfed vision and you like
promoted language where the it's like
all processing is on the same playing
field. It's all electronic. And I just I
think this might this is like my crazy
ass dumb non-technical crackpot theory,
but I think this might be part of why
just like from an information theory
perspective that like maybe language and
vision are on a similar playing field by
the time you get to like LLMs and then
LLMs are we're just a really really
smart architecture that's better suited
for language than for vision. um how
dumb does this sound especially to you
Don the neuroscientist
>> Jesse also has some background in
cognitive computational science right
>> so I would say my my point here is like
look much of what we're doing in
knowledge work we haven't evolved to do
right we're sitting on these computers
reading these things writing these memos
whatever we are not evolved to do this
it's new to us our brains are not wired
for this still nevertheless it's useful
to have LMS to do this for us and you
know as humans we're heavily vision
biased you Other rodents are more
alactory biased and I've worked on these
things myself before. So what's the uh
real estate in the brain that's
allocated to vision and you know
exhibital loes versus like language
areas as a temporal lobe probably more
vision. I'll have to check with check
chat GPT but I think that's the
situation
>> you don't know from memory.
>> No man I'm externalizing. I'm a big rag
believer in my personal lifestyle
[laughter]
but um I think
>> in the limit we're all it's all rag. I
internalize just u you know important
things like um my emotions to you. No,
just kidding. Sorry. [laughter]
Um
>> anyways um yeah and vision is dominating
when people are training vision language
models they end up the vi language ends
up dominating the vision content there.
Um but yeah it's it's hard to say that
because a certain brain is more you know
biased towards a certain modality
doesn't mean necessarily that we're
going to more efficiently do it. I do
think that efforts on like brain
computer interfaces should take this
into account. How do you then relay it
back to the brain? That's where I think
it's really important to think like what
real estate do we have there right now?
Um but for knowledge work, it's equally
fine if it's text. I think
>> last question if if everything goes
right, what does the world look like in
five 10 years and then what is engram's
role in it? I think I'm imagining like a
world where everyone has their own model
um that is really different from the
other person's model and from the
frontier model and all of these kind of
serve different purposes and to have a
model that really you know I think
people often talk about like knowing
knowing you um but also like um kind of
like helping you in the ways that make
sense to you um personally um whether
it's like an individual or a team. I
think there's an element of like having
different kinds of intelligence
everywhere.
>> Yeah. And to me actually it's it's a
variant of the story where like you know
in neuroscience we know that memory and
navigation are pretty closely related
same circuits in the brain that you know
represent landmarks in space are in
charge of some you know elements of
episodic memory and things like this and
for me I think the company can be you
know the actual LLM interface to the
data plane for everyone. So sharing some
similarities to great companies like you
know data bricks and Oracle where you
know we form these memories that happen
to be neural memories with models that
happen to be personalized and happens to
be there's hundreds of millions of them
but they're basically a neural interface
to the data plane in a way that's that's
very different from what we know and
it's more efficient it's more
associative it's not representing the
file system as it is it's representing a
brain state u of that file system so
that's for me a vision
>> beautiful vision to end on thank you
guys so much for coming by the share
with building.
>> Awesome. Love it. Thank you guys.
[music]
>> [music]